Dear Dr Doerr

Single-cell (sc) omics is currently revolutionizing biology. This progress is paved not only by new technological innovations but as importantly by novel data analysis approaches. For sc transcriptomics, several standard analysis methods have been introduced by papers in your journal. 

The next frontier is now sc epigenetics. Specifically, single-cell bisulfite sequencing (scBS) technology is now becoming mature -- but approaches to analyse such data is still largely missing: currently, most practioners rely on rather simplistic self-made analysis pipelines that fail (as we show) to make full use of the available data.  % we could also note here that scRNA-seq took off when it was commercialized by 10X, and that companies are now also commercializing scBS.

We here present 'scbs', a comprehensive methodology with an easy-to-use software toolkit, to analyse scBS data. We have developed new mathematical and informatical approaches to preprocess scBS data, to store it optimally, to perform quality assessment, to identify informative loci in an unbiased manner, to perform quantitation for these and to obtain profile vectors per cell that are suitable for dimension reduction. Our methods transform the data into a form that is suitable for further processing using established methods from scRNA-Seq, such as dimension reduction, clustering, trajectory inference etc., enabling practitioners to leverage their experience in analysing scRNA-Seq data also for scBS data. 

We demonstrate the power of our method using two data sets. The first of these has been analysed before, providing a baseline, that we compare against. The second is our own data, basis of a companion paper that is currently under review with Nature, where we demonstrate how ou analysis methodology yields access to deep, novel and unexpected insights into the role of DNA methylation in stem cell biology. (For that companion paper, see preprint https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.07.13.499860 or manuscript 2023-01-00646A in Nature's manuscript system.)

When writing the present manuscript, we aimed at addressing not merely biostatisticians but biology practitioners who need to understand, too, how their tools work. Therefore, the main text motivates and explains our methods in an easily accessible manner, supported by carefully designed illustrations, while providing all mathematical details in the Methods part. The main text also provides a clear demonstration of the methods results on real data. Furthermore, on the software web page, we provide a step-for-step tutorial to make usage as easy as possible.

For single-cell *transcriptomics*, the toolkits Seurat and Scanpy have become the standard frameworks to perform analyses. For single-cell *epigenetics*, nothing like this is available. We are confident that our work will fill this gap -- and therefore, we are convinced that this work is of greatest interest to the readers of Nature Biotechnology.  % probably can't make this claim since there are now some tools that aim to fill the scanpy niche, such as episcanpy, but last time I checked there is not much new methodology in there.

With best regards

